atha vāriṇi ghorataraṃ phaṇinaṃ
prativārayituṃ kṛtadhīrbhagavan |
drutamāritha tīraganīpataruṃ
viṣamārutaśoṣitaparṇacayam ||1||
atha vāriṇi	then in the water
ghorataraṃ phaṇinaṃ	very fierce that serpent
prativārayituṃ	to drive away
kṛtadhī:	having decided
bhagavan	O Lord
drutam-āritha	quickly (Thou) approached
tīraga-nīpa-taruṃ	the bank situated Kadamba tree
viṣa-māruta-śoṣita-	the poisoned breeze had dried up
parṇa-cayam	the cluster of leaves
O Lord! Thou then made up Thy mind to drive away the fierce serpent from the waters. Thou quickly approached and got up on a Kadamba tree standing on the bank of the river, with its leaves withered due to the poisonous breeze.
adhiruhya padāmburuheṇa ca taṃ
navapallavatulyamanojñarucā |
hradavāriṇi dūrataraṃ nyapata:
parighūrṇitaghorataraṅggaṇe ||2||
adhiruhya	climbing with
pada-ambu-ruheṇa	feet tender lotus like
ca taṃ	and that (tree)
nava-pallava-tulya-	like tender new leaves
manojña-rucā	charming and splendorous
hrada-vāriṇi	into the deep water
dūrataraṃ nyapata:	far out (Thou) jumped
parighūrṇita-	with swirling
ghora-taraṅga-gaṇe	fierce waves of water
Thou climbed that tree with Thy lotus like splendorous charming feet resembling tender leaves, and with a long leap jumped far out into the deep waters with swirling fierce waves.
bhuvanatrayabhārabhṛto bhavato
gurubhāravikampivijṛmbhijalā |
parimajjayati sma dhanuśśatakaṃ
taṭinī jhaṭiti sphuṭaghoṣavatī ||3||
bhuvana-traya-bhāra-bhṛta:	of the three worlds the weight bearing
bhavata: guru-bhāra-	of Thee the immense weight (causing)
vikampi-vijṛmbhi-jalā	swirling and swelling with its waters
parimajjayati sma	started to submerge
dhanu:-śatakaṃ	the area of a hundred bows (in measurement)
taṭinī jhaṭiti	on the river bed, and suddenly
sphuṭa-ghoṣavatī	(the river) made an intense roar
When, Thou the bearer of the weight of the three worlds, jumped, Thy immense weight caused the waters to swirl and swell. On the river bed an area of a hundred bows (yards) submerged, as a sudden roar arose from the river.
atha dikṣu vidikṣu parikṣubhita-
bhramitodaravārininādabharai: |
udakādudagāduragādhipati-
stvadupāntamaśāntaruṣā'ndhamanā: ||4||
atha dikṣu vidikṣu	then, in all the directions and the intermediary directions
parikṣubhita-bhramita-	turbulent swirling
udara-vāri-nināda-bharai:	from the middle of the waters roaring aloud
udakāt-udagāt-	from (that) water came out
uragādhipati:-	the king of serpents
tvat-upāntam-	near Thee
aśānta-ruṣā-	disturbed and angered
andhamanā:	and so blinded (with rage)
The loud roar from the middle of the waters which extended to all the directions and the intermediary directions, disturbed and angered the serpent king Kaaliya. He came out of the water and rushed up to Thee in a fit of blinded anger.
phaṇaśṛṅgasahasravinissṛmara-
jvaladagnikaṇograviṣāmbudharam |
purata: phaṇinaṃ samalokayathā
bahuśṛṅgiṇamañjanaśailamiva ||5||
phaṇa-śṛṅga-	(with) hoods , peak (like)
sahasra-vini:sṛmara-	thousands of them emitting
jvalat-agni-kaṇa-	burning like fire flakes
ugra-viṣa-ambudharam	fierce poison fluid bearing
purata: phaṇinaṃ	in front the serpent
samalokayathā:	(Thou) saw
bahu-śṛṅgi-gaṇam-	many peaked
añjana-śailam-iva	black mountain, as if
Thou saw the serpent in front with his thousands of peak like hoods emitting burning fire flakes and fierce poison fluid, looking like a many peaked black mountain.
jvaladakṣi parikṣaradugraviṣa-
śvasanoṣmabhara: sa mahābhujaga: |
paridaśya bhavantamanantabalaṃ
samaveṣṭayadasphuṭaceṣṭamaho ||6||
jvalat-akṣi	with flaming eyes
parikṣarat-ugra-viṣa-	emitting deadly poison
śvasan-ūṣmabhara:	breathing out intense heat
sa mahābhujaga:	that huge serpent
paridaśya	biting
bhavantam-anantabalaṃ	Thee of limitless strength
samaveṣṭayat-	coiled (around Thee)
asphuṭa-ceṣṭam-	making invisible Thy movements
aho	Alas
Alas! That huge serpent emitting deadly poison and breathing out intense heat, bit Thee of limitless strength, all over Thy body. Then it coiled around Thee making Thy body and Thy movements invisible.
avilokya bhavantamathākulite
taṭagāmini bālakadhenugaṇe |
vrajagehatale'pyanimittaśataṃ
samudīkṣya gatā yamunāṃ paśupā: ||7||
avilokya bhavantam-	not seeing Thee
atha-ākulite	then distressed
taṭa-gāmini	(who) to the bank (of river Yamunaa) had come
bālaka-dhenu-gaṇe	the children and the cows all
vraja-geha-tale-api-	in Gokula houses also
animitta-śataṃ	evil omens innumerable
samudīkṣya gatā	seeing went
yamunāṃ paśupā:	towards Yamunaa the Gopas
The Gopa boys and the cows were distressed when they did not see Thee, and went to the bank of the river Yamunaa. In the houses in Gokula also the Gopas saw hundreds of evil omens and they also rushed towards Yamunaa.
akhileṣu vibho bhavadīya daśā-
mavalokya jihāsuṣu jīvabharam |
phaṇibandhanamāśu vimucya javā-
dudagamyata hāsajuṣā bhavatā ||8||
akhileṣu	(as) all of them
vibho	O Lord
bhavadīya-daśām	Thy plight
avalokya	seeing
jihāsuṣu	ready to give up their
jīvabharam	lives
phaṇi-bandhanam-	the coils of the snake
āśu vimucya	quickly shedding
javāt-udagamyata	hastily emerged
hāsajuṣā bhavatā	with a smile, Thou
O Lord! All of them were overwhelmed with grief on seeing Thy plight and were ready to give up their lives in order to save Thee. Just then, Thou quickly shed the coils of the snake and hastily emerged with a smile.
adhiruhya tata: phaṇirājaphaṇān
nanṛte bhavatā mṛdupādarucā |
kalaśiñjitanūpuramañjumila-
tkarakaṅkaṇasaṅkulasaṅkvaṇitam ||9||
adhiruhya tata:	climbing upon then
phaṇi-rāja-phaṇān	the serpent king,s hoods
nanṛte bhavatā	dance was performed by Thee
mṛdu-pāda-rucā	with delicate feet beautiful
kalaśiñjita-nūpura-	the gentle sound of the anklets
mañju-milat-	beautifully mingling with
kara-kaṅkaṇa-saṅkula-	the bangles on the wrists'
saṅkvaṇitam	tinkling
Then Thou mounted on the hoods of the serpent king and danced with Thy delicate beautiful feet. The gentle sound of the anklets mingled beautifully and rhythmically with the tinkling of the bangles on Thy wrists.
jahṛṣu: paśupāstutuṣurmunayo
vavṛṣu: kusumāni surendragaṇā: |
tvayi nṛtyati mārutagehapate
paripāhi sa māṃ tvamadāntagadāt ||10||
jahṛṣu: paśupā:-	rejoiced the Gopas
tutuṣu:-munaya:	sang hymns the sages
vavṛṣu: kusumāni	showered flowers
surendra-gaṇā:	the gods' groups
tvayi nṛtyati	when Thou danced
mārutagehapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur
paripāhi	save
sa	That (Thou)
māṃ	me
tvam-	Thou
adānta-gadāt	(from) severe illness
As Thou performed the dance, the Gopas rejoiced, the sages sang hymns, and the gods showered flowers. O Lord of the Guruvaayur temple! Such that Thou are, save me from the severe illness.